yo it up you know I try to talk about
issues on this channel in a way that
will still be meaningful five years from
now if someone randomly clicks on this
video and doesn't know the context for
the discussion I'm having and I think
that still five years in the future
we're gonna have an issue where
vegans react negatively to this question
of what about farm laborers what about
you know the human rights of people who
are picking vegetables where people
react to that a negative and defensive
way because it is thrown in the faces of
vegans as an excuse not with sincere
interests not really as a sincere
question at all it's thrown at vegans in
the same way that what about lions it's
yeah well what about lions do you want
to have a conversation to the Lions you
want to talk about habitat conservation
for lions you want to talk about natural
parks and the diets of lions and how to
keep lying and that's okay yeah all
right I'm vegan but I can I can talk to
you about lions no problem maybe we can
have a real interesting conference what
do you know about lions
well I owns an important part of your
life I remember growing up with the
sound of lions growling on the horizon
um
look man uh this is a strangely jocular
way to start the video but my point here
is what about lions could be a
meaningful conversation could be the
beginning of an important set of
questions but we as vegans normally just
encounter it as a kind of hostile
contemptuous and dismissive thing
likewise the question of well where does
your fruit come from where do your
vegetables come from that does link to a
whole bunch of really important and
meaningful questions but most vegans are
apprehensive and respond negatively
because they're only used to hearing
that as a kind of dismissive distraction
as an excuse for why people eat meat
anyway so coming from a perspective of
meat-eaters who say well if you can't be
a hundred percent morally pure why
should I try to even be ten percent or
50 percent morally pure if somebody is
going to get exploited by something
anyway
then why shouldn't I just continue to
eat hamburgers now not everyone can be
interested in everything I personally I
am someone who's interested in how our
food is produced how where rice comes
from where vegetables and fruit come
from we'll come back to that interest in
a second but I understand not everyone
can be for a sort of parallel set of
questions I think it is really
interesting to look at where clothing
comes from
now obviously vegans refuse to wear
leather for moral reasons vegans also
refused to wear wool for ethical reasons
if that really makes my life difficult
because here in Canada men's clothing is
it's all made out of wool it's a huge
problem for me it's really difficult for
me to find remotely respectable-looking
clothing uh but someone could say quite
correctly well what about factories that
make clothing out of cotton what about
human rights what about the conditions
of workers what about and this is a
meaningful question this can be a
meaningful question but if people are
asking it just in a dismissive way of
saying well conditions in clothing
factor that this shirt is just caught
and obviously everything I'm wearing is
vegan but still what about the human
rights of people who make these these
clothes in this kind of context um
there's a really good documentary called
China out blue it's just two words China
blue I could put a link in the
description I think you can see that
online for like $0.99 I remember I paid
for it I saw it legitimately but it was
either 99 cents or a dollar 99 so it's
almost free and that's a really
memorable portrait of what factory
conditions are like not in the worst
Factory in China by any means it's
really not it's not remotely the worst
if anything at that point in time it
might have been an above-average
Factory in terms of quality of life for
people there in many ways in many ways
it's a good Factory and that's why the
the owners of the factory allowed the
documentary to be made but nevertheless
you look at the kind of crummy difficult
terrifying life the people in that
factory are living in many ways you get
the kind of human story of it and now
you got questions now um I
had okay so say a little bit more about
me and my interest in this field yes I
was interested in migrant workers and
farm conditions back when I lived in
Toronto Ontario Canada and I was a
political science student the time was a
much younger man and you know we had
this bizarre situation in southern
Ontario where our farm parties was being
picked by Nicaraguans and as I looked
into this you might think these
Nicaraguans would cross the border just
once and then stay in Canada for a long
time no even though they were illegal
immigrants these Nicaraguans were almost
universally they were returning to their
hometown once a year so they were going
by land and illegally crossing those
borders annually and of course twice
because you got to go one direction turn
around and come back
so going from Canada into the u.s. from
the US into Mexico and then from Mexico
down to Nicaragua totally unbelievable
surreal situation and the jobs they were
doing those Nicaraguan farmers were jobs
that in my grandfather's time would have
been done by white Canadians white
english-speaking Canadians who also
probably did not have great working
conditions but to me from that study at
that time when I was interested in those
questions within Canada because these
are not questions you can receive
globally the situation for farmworkers
in Canada is not the same as it is in
China you know you've got to develop
these expertise in a way that's selling
it to a particular place tubular point
in time when I should mention true the
point in time I read some articles
recently about Ontario again
specifically about Apple farming in
Ontario where they were talking about
the the former pattern of illegal
immigrants from Nicaragua now being
replaced with legal immigrants from the
Philippines
importing cheap laborers in the
Philippines that our current government
programs again bazaars the distances
involved so your apples are being picked
and packed by people from the
Philippines and these Filipinos in order
to get the paperwork a lot of them have
qualifications as nurses and
schoolteachers they're being kind of
underemployed in her farming industry
really strange to the questions but I
mentioned this because this shows how
much the situation can change in just a
few years in one particular place in one
particular point in time the question of
who is doing the farm labor is worth
thinking about and is worth looking into
but the answers may not be what you
think there but look in my grandfather's
day this type of agricultural labor was
done by white english-speaking Canadians
and stereotypically those guys were
hobos if you look into the history of
the term hobo this was a specific
stereotype about the type of guy who
would ride the train for free to get
back and forth between the city and
where the fruit was harvested who would
do seasonal labor and then he would
stereotypically be a drunk or an
alcoholic in between harvest seasons
when they were neither picking or
planting and so on and back in the 1930s
and so on there was a whole subculture
surrounding this guys like Woody Guthrie
have all these songs about being a hobo
and they specifically refer to work on a
farm these were guys who lived part time
in the cities and part time in the
countryside and so on so I say this to
say I'm not glorifying the past that had
its own social contradictions of its own
form of oppression and so on but there
are fundamental differences if those
jobs in southern Ontario working on
those farms were being done by Canadian
citizens those Canadian citizens can go
to the police if there's a problem they
can speak English in theory they can
form a union and they can bargain for
higher wages they can access health care
if you're a Canadian citizen you can go
to a hospital and you can demand to get
treatment even if you don't have any
paperwork you speak English fluently and
you were Canadian one way or another you
can go to the hospital you go to the
doctor if you're an illegal immigrant
from Nicaragua and you get injured
whatever all kinds of accidents happen
what are you gonna do and nobody really
wants to talk about this issue because
politically you are presumed to be
right-wing if you in any way question
the current neoliberal paradigm of mass
migration for
wage-labour whether it's questioning the
Filipino example or the Nicaraguan
example or what have you if you would
anyway try to say look I think this is
deeply problematic and yes the issues of
it being cross-border labor really do
change the picture they really do in a
meaningful way transform a situation
that would have issues of exploitation
and poor wages to begin with and it gets
dramatically worse because those
questions I did a whole an exhausting
semester long course dealing with
migration politics last year and at the
beginning I talked the professor I said
well you know these are really important
issues and I've cared about them for
years and years but nobody can talk
about the makanda they're in a black box
of political issues nobody can discuss
because neither the left-wing nor the
right-wing or the center nobody can deal
with questions of migration and labor
rights I remember the professor reacted
she didn't know what I was talking about
yeah well during that course let me tell
you she knew what I was talking about
just asking these questions is I can
tell you in Canada is not politically
acceptable not for any it's become part
of the unquestioned new normal of
neoliberalism that you know in Ontario
Canada we eat food produced by
Nicaraguans and Filipinos and that we
don't deal with the surreal
contradictions of questions that raises
so look I also lived if you watch the
channel regularly you know I used to
live in Laos I used to live in Cambodia
in that part of the world I was heavily
interested in where my food came from
and where in food production and
agriculture I don't mean where my food
came from I was really interested in
agriculture and I hung out with
agronomists and in terms of what I could
speak about in the language in the Lao
language I learned all this vocabulary
related to rice farming and it's so much
research both on what agriculture was
the farming that was going on and about
government policies UN policies
international policies how agriculture
had been changed in recent years I was
really into it I was massively into
agriculture in that part of the world
where of course there were very
different questions of human rights and
wages being paid and what-have-you it's
a totally different although somewhat
parallel set of questions surrounding
food production but yeah that was
something was really interested in
really passionate in and I can remember
talking to one woman a woman whose her
her University diploma was in agronomy I
said to her look you know honestly for
years now I was thinking if I could do
my life over again I wish I would have
gotten a diploma in agronomy now I don't
feel that way anymore actually for all
kinds of reasons I now I don't regret
that that wasn't my my academic focus
but I just say not in a trivial way
during those years in Asia these issues
were a meaningful part of my life now
they're not right now and as a vegan I
don't think we can say in a simple way
that they have to be yes how legumes are
produced how vegetables are produced how
rice and wheat are produced those are
really important questions but I think
if you met someone who's vegan who had
no interest in those things but who was
really interested in how toys are
produced that's also a completely
legitimate area of study I you know if
you're a parent I've got a two-year-old
daughter I got to buy gifts and send
them who are in the mail and it's a
problem for me that most of this stuff
is kind of plastic and manufactured in
China and I wish I had more positive
alternatives and I'm out there looking
all the time
can I get something made out of wood can
I get something made in the country that
has human rights believe me if someone
manufactured goods there's a huge
difference because only made in South
Korea and something made in China
so they made in Thailand even you know
even though God I know too much about
factory conditions intact weapons I know
both factory conditions and farm
conditions in Thailand because I've done
the research but look it's not at a
false humility that I say not everyone
can be an expert on everything and it's
good to be honest with yourself and
others about what you care about where
you are going to try to exercise your
limited capacity for activism and for
some people that's going to be
agriculture for some people that might
be clothing like this documentary I
mentioned about how blue jeans get made
called China blue and yeah migrant
workers
rights it is a specific issue it's a
single issue not everyone can be an
expert not everyone could be an activist
but obviously the inspiration for this
video
in terms of why just filmed this Nell
was just getting ready to work out
before I go to school is I'm happy for
this guy
the vegan cheetah Charles Marlow I'm
happy for him that he's you know
pursuing his own interests um
I don't look at this guy the way other
people do other people look at him kind
of hyper critically as if why can't he
be the perfect vegan Messiah I look at
him the same way I look at my own
brothers just said years ago when I
first made a video talking with a guy I
have a I have 99 different brothers
several of them have had lives you know
dented by drug and alcohol use a guy
like vegan cheetah he probably had not
thought about any of this stuff five
years ago and in the past in the past
couple of years he got really
politically awakened by veganism and at
first his engagement veganism wasn't
political then he starts asking these
other questions he gets more gauged and
those lead to new questions new
political interests new forms of
political engagement and that's great
and that's wonderful and I would be so
happy if any of my own brothers
responded that way any my brothers or
sisters and they don't and I you know I
think less of them I've got to tell you
my brothers and sisters in terms of DNA
I don't think they were born you know
innately less intelligent than myself
but they have never started on that path
that vegan cheetah went down now on the
other hand again at the very beginning
this video I said why many vegans react
negatively to these questions being
raised and uh again just simply vegans
shouldn't get defensive no you can't
research everything no you can't be
interested in everything and no it is
not necessarily our approach against you
if you are not interested in rice
agriculture and Laos or in Apple farming
in Ontario they're all specific issues
and instead if your interests and your
capacity for activism is attached to
clothing production or toy production do
that politics is
the art of the possible figuring out
what's possible and the reason why
veganism is such a huge issue is that
it's possible for everybody it's
possible for you here and now no matter
who you are watching this video and it
is not possible for everybody to be
engaged with factory conditions in China
farm conditions or in ontario or any
other specific issue but if you can it's
wonderful